# Machine-Learning-for-solving-the-characterization-of-Dark-Energy
#### *Phd. Alberto Hernandez Almada | CSs. Ivan Yahir Gomez Mancilla*
#### *Verano de la Ciencia Region Centro 2023*
## Introduction
Hubble's Law, proposed in the 1920s by the American astronomer Edwin Hubble who, from observations made at the Mount Wilson Observatory of cepheid variable stars in spiral nebulae that allowed him to calculate the distance to these objects and based on the redshift, discovered a linear relationship indicating that the farther away a galaxy is, the greater its redshift, thus suggesting the expansion of the universe.
The Cosmic Microwave Background radiation is defined as the cooled remnant of the first light that traveled freely through the universe and it is since the 1940s that its existence has been predicted by George Gamow, Ralph Alpher and Robert Herman as a relic of the evolution of the early universe. It was not until 1965, when the pair of American radio astronomers Arno Penzias and Bob Wilson at Bell Telephone Laboratories, recorded a signal on their radio telescope that seemed to be unattributable to any precise source in the sky, coming from everywhere and remaining, no matter what, with the same intensity, that sufficient evidence of such a phenomenon was raised.
This discovery showed solid evidence for the Big Bang theory, also put forward by George Gamow, which describes that in the beginning of time, all the matter in the universe was concentrated in a tiny portion of space and, because of a big explosion, all this matter began a period of cooling and expansion giving rise to the universe as we know it today. This theory, widely adopted by contemporary astronomers, also showed great affinity to the phenomena of the expansion of the universe, so it was quickly accepted as the explanation for the origin of the universe.
However, it was in the 1990's when observations made by astronomers Adam Riess, Saul Perlmutter and Brian P. Schmidt demonstrated an accelerated expansion of the universe that contradicts the natural notion of the Big Bang theory, since, according to these observations, the universe is expanding at an ever-increasing rate. This acceleration can only be caused by an energy that we still do not know today, and which has been called dark energy.
## Statement of the problem
About dark energy there is more ignorance than knowledge, we know how much of it there is in the universe due to the effects it causes in its expansion, however, we still ignore its characteristics. The evidence shows that about 68% of the universe is dark energy, while dark matter makes up about 27% and less than 5% is all that is ever observed.
Since the discovery of the accelerating expansion of the universe and dark energy as the cause of that acceleration, much of the scientific cosmological community has been engaged in the so far unresolved attempt to explain the composition or nature of dark energy. The proposals have diversified, being presented from diverse perspectives such as the accelerating Universe Fluids or the modifications to Einstein's theory of relativity, obtaining from them some of the models that have been considered closer to the resolution of the problem or bases for further studies; such as the Lamba Cold Dark Matter model, which is the standard model for the explanation of dark energy, or the parameterizations of dark energy, the Chaplyginean fluid, unimodular gravity, the emergent phenomenological model of dark energy and generalized emergent dark energy, which are presented as important candidates for the resolution of the problem. 
Despite all these efforts, the problem of dark energy characterization remains open and unresolved.
## Hypothesis
We propose an innovative approach to attack the problem by which, using machine learning technologies (Machine learning and Deep learning), based on data from cosmological observations of celestial bodies, we can perform a deep analysis of the patterns that these observations may yield, allowing us to obtain two beneficial results: more informed knowledge for the possible proposal of a new model for the characterization of dark energy, or a guide for the search of new observations for future studies in the area.
